
### Opportunistic approaches


Example architecture of a grid computing system connecting many personal 
computers over the internet
Opportunistic Supercomputing is a form of networked grid computing whereby a 
“super virtual computer” of many loosely coupled volunteer computing machines 
performs very large computing tasks. Grid computing has been applied to a 
number of large-scale embarrassingly parallel problems that require 
supercomputing performance scales. However, basic grid and cloud computing 
approaches that rely on volunteer computing can not handle traditional 
supercomputing tasks such as fluid dynamic simulations.

The fastest grid computing system is the distributed computing project 
[Folding@home](http://folding.stanford.edu). F@h reported 43.1 petaflops of x86 processing power as of June 
2014. Of this, 42.5 petaflops are contributed by clients running on various 
GPUs, and the rest from various CPU systems.

The BOINC platform hosts a number of distributed computing projects. As of May 
2011, BOINC recorded a processing power of over 5.5 petaflops through over 
480,000 active computers on the network The most active project (measured by 
computational power), MilkyWay@home, reports processing power of over 700 
teraflops through over 33,000 active computers.

As of May 2011, GIMPS's distributed Mersenne Prime search currently achieves 
about 60 teraflops through over 25,000 registered computers. The Internet 
PrimeNet Server supports GIMPS's grid computing approach, one of the earliest 
and most successful grid computing projects, since 1997.

### Quasi-opportunistic approaches
Quasi-opportunistic supercomputing is a form of distributed computing whereby 
the “super virtual computer” of a large number of networked geographically 
disperse computers performs huge processing power demanding computing tasks. 
Quasi-opportunistic supercomputing aims to provide a higher quality of service 
than opportunistic grid computing by achieving more control over the assignment 
of tasks to distributed resources and the use of intelligence about the 
availability and reliability of individual systems within the supercomputing 
network. However, quasi-opportunistic distributed execution of demanding 
parallel computing software in grids should be achieved through implementation 
of grid-wise allocation agreements, co-allocation subsystems, communication 
topology-aware allocation mechanisms, fault tolerant message passing libraries 
and data pre-conditioning.
