
Approaches to supercomputer architecture have taken dramatic turns since the 
earliest systems were introduced in the 1960s. Early supercomputer 
architectures pioneered by Seymour Cray relied on compact innovative designs 
and local parallelism to achieve superior computational peak performance. 
However, in time the demand for increased computational power ushered in the 
age of massively parallel systems.

While the supercomputers of the 1970s used only a few processors, in the 1990s, 
machines with thousands of processors began to appear and by the end of the 
20th century, massively parallel supercomputers with tens of thousands of 
"off-the-shelf" processors were the norm. Supercomputers of the 21st century 
can use over 100,000 processors (some being graphic units) connected by fast 
connections.

Throughout the decades, the management of heat density has remained a key issue 
for most centralized supercomputers. The large amount of heat generated by a 
system may also have other effects, e.g. reducing the lifetime of other system 
components. There have been diverse approaches to heat management, from pumping 
Fluorinert through the system, to a hybrid liquid-air cooling system or air 
cooling with normal air conditioning temperatures.



Systems with a massive number of processors generally take one of two paths. In 
the grid computing approach, the processing power of a large number of 
computers, organised as distributed, diverse administrative domains, is 
opportunistically used whenever a computer is available. In another approach, a 
large number of processors are used in close proximity to each other, e.g. in a 
computer cluster. In such a centralized massively parallel system the speed and 
flexibility of the interconnect becomes very important and modern 
supercomputers have used various approaches ranging from enhanced Infiniband 
systems to three-dimensional torus interconnects. The use of multi-core 
processors combined with centralization is an emerging direction, e.g. as in 
the Cyclops64 system.

As the price/performance of general purpose graphic processors (GPGPUs) has 
improved, a number of petaflop supercomputers such as Tianhe-I and Nebulae have 
started to rely on them. However, other systems such as the K computer continue 
to use conventional processors such as SPARC-based designs and the overall 
applicability of GPGPUs in general purpose high performance computing 
applications has been the subject of debate, in that while a GPGPU maybe tuned 
to score well on specific benchmarks its overall applicability to everyday 
algorithms may be limited unless significant effort is spent to tune the 
application towards it. However, GPUs are gaining ground and in 2012 the Jaguar 
supercomputer was transformed into Titan by replacing CPUs with GPUs.

A number of "special-purpose" systems have been designed, dedicated to a single 
problem. This allows the use of specially programmed FPGA chips or even custom 
VLSI chips, allowing better price/performance ratios by sacrificing generality. 
Examples of special-purpose supercomputers include Belle, Deep Blue, and Hydra, 
for playing chess, Gravity Pipe for astrophysics, MDGRAPE-3 for protein 
structure computation molecular dynamics and Deep Crack, for breaking the DES 
cipher.


### Energy usage and heat management

A typical supercomputer consumes large amounts of electrical power, almost all 
of which is converted into heat, requiring cooling. For example, Tianhe-1A 
consumes 4.04 Megawatts of electricity. The cost to power and cool the system 
can be significant, e.g. 4MW at $0.10/kWh is $400 an hour or about $3.5 million 
per year.


Heat management is a major issue in complex electronic devices, and affects 
powerful computer systems in various ways. The thermal design power and CPU 
power dissipation issues in supercomputing surpass those of traditional 
computer cooling technologies. The supercomputing awards for green computing 
reflect this issue.

The packing of thousands of processors together inevitably generates 
significant amounts of heat density that need to be dealt with. The Cray 2 was 
liquid cooled, and used a Fluorinert "cooling waterfall" which was forced 
through the modules under pressure. However, the submerged liquid cooling 
approach was not practical for the multi-cabinet systems based on off-the-shelf 
processors, and in System X a special cooling system that combined air 
conditioning with liquid cooling was developed in conjunction with the Liebert 
company.

In the Blue Gene system, IBM deliberately used low power processors to deal 
with heat density. On the other hand, the IBM Power 775, released in 2011, has 
closely packed elements that require water cooling. The IBM Aquasar system, on 
the other hand uses hot water cooling to achieve energy efficiency, the water 
being used to heat buildings as well.

The energy efficiency of computer systems is generally measured in terms of 
"FLOPS per Watt". In 2008 IBM's Roadrunner operated at 376 MFLOPS/Watt. In 
November 2010, the Blue Gene/Q reached 1684 MFLOPS/Watt. In June 2011 the top 2 
spots on the Green 500 list were occupied by Blue Gene machines in New York 
(one achieving 2097 MFLOPS/W) with the DEGIMA cluster in Nagasaki placing third 
with 1375 MFLOPS/W
