
The history of supercomputing goes back to the 1960s, with the Atlas at the 
University of Manchester and a series of computers at Control Data Corporation 
(CDC), designed by [Seymour Cray](http://www.cray.com/About/History.aspx).
These used innovative designs and parallelism to achieve superior computational
peak performance.

The Atlas was a joint venture between Ferranti and the Manchester University 
and was designed to operate at processing speeds approaching one microsecond 
per instruction, about one million instructions per second. The first Atlas was 
officially commissioned on 7 December 1962 as one of the world's first 
supercomputers â€“ considered to be the most powerful computer in the world at 
that time by a considerable margin, and equivalent to four IBM 7094s.

The CDC 6600, released in 1964, was designed by Cray to be the fastest in the 
world by a large margin. Cray switched from germanium to silicon transistors, 
which he ran very fast, solving the overheating problem by introducing 
refrigeration. Given that the 6600 outran all computers of the time by about 10 
times, it was dubbed a supercomputer and defined the supercomputing market when 
one hundred computers were sold at $8 million each.

![A Cray-1 preserved at the Deutsches Museum](cray1.jpg)

Cray left CDC in 1972 to form his own company. Four years after leaving CDC, 
Cray delivered the 80 MHz Cray 1 in 1976, and it became one of the most 
successful supercomputers in history. The Cray-2 released in 1985 was an 8 
processor liquid cooled computer and Fluorinert was pumped through it as it 
operated. It performed at 1.9 gigaflops and was the world's fastest until 1990.

While the supercomputers of the 1980s used only a few processors, in the 1990s, 
machines with thousands of processors began to appear both in the United States 
and in Japan, setting new computational performance records. Fujitsu's 
Numerical Wind Tunnel supercomputer used 166 vector processors to gain the top 
spot in 1994 with a peak speed of 1.7 gigaflops per processor. The Hitachi 
SR2201 obtained a peak performance of 600 gigaflops in 1996 by using 2048 
processors connected via a fast three-dimensional crossbar network. The Intel 
Paragon could have 1000 to 4000 Intel i860 processors in various 
configurations, and was ranked the fastest in the world in 1993. The Paragon 
was a MIMD machine which connected processors via a high speed two dimensional 
mesh, allowing processes to execute on separate nodes; communicating via the 
Message Passing Interface.
